Are the Tradives successful reactionary
feminists? Are they Louise Perry readers
who've taken who've taken the right the
right point of view?
>> Yes. Who found their inter ideology and
double down?
>> The growing alienation between men and
women is to my mind one of the biggest
stories of our time.
>> I'm choosing to continue to be celibate.
>> I have zero interest in dating ever
again.
>> I'm not dating nobody.
It's not worth it.
>> It's visible in our politics where the
sexes are more polarized than ever
before. And it's visible all over the
culture in a feminist and progressive
mood that seems to despair over
heterosexuality itself and in the rise
of toxic online misogynist influencers
on the political right.
>> Women exist for sex.
>> You guys need to be able to stand up to
your woman and tell her, "Shut the [__]
up." Okay?
>> Females don't have independent thought.
They don't come up with anything.
They're just empty vessels.
>> And then of course there's the debate
about the mysterious tradife phenomenon.
>> I submit to my husband,
>> our husbands are to be the bread winners
as we are to be the bread makers.
>> And my guest this week has some
provocative ideas about where the
trouble started. Louise Perry is a
reactionary feminist, a columnist for
the Wall Street Journal Free Expression
section, and the author of the book The
Case Against the Sexual Revolution.
Louise Perry. Welcome to Interesting
Times.
>> Hello. Lovely to be here.
>> So, I'm going to ask you to start by
talking about a book that you wrote
several years ago now in the misty days
of the early 2020s that was called The
Case Against the Sexual Revolution. So,
make that case.
>> I should probably start by saying what I
think the sexual revolution is or was
>> or was.
>> So, I think it's two things. I think it
was um
an ideological revolution, but I think
at least as importantly, it was also a
material revolution because of the pill.
The distinctive thing about the pill
compared with other contraception is
that women can control it themselves and
it's invisible. So, you can be walking
around temporarily sterile and in that
sense a different creature from someone
who is uh fertile. And in some sense,
it's difficult for us now to
um
really fully imagine what it would be
like to live in a world without
contraception. It's like the the the
technological basis of so much of
contemporary uh ways of life and of
politics. And so the book was not a
reputation of the sexual revolution. I
am a beneficiary of the sexual
revolution in loads of ways. And I think
that there were there were upsides. It's
as the title says, it's the case
against.
>> So what is the case against? What then
is the critique of the new world order?
>> Um
that there are important ways in which
men and women are different from one
another, which in any other era is just
a completely trivial thing to say, but
it is is somewhat provocative right now.
Um there are obvious physical
differences between the sexes. Only
women can get pregnant. there's a um
there's an inherent asymmetry in terms
of physical vulnerability um which is
just a a fact that we can't get away
from. And then more controversially,
there are also some ways in which men
and women differ on average
psychologically. There are obviously
outliers in every direction, but in
general, so when thinking about sexual
relationships,
um, men have a stronger drive in general
towards having casual sex and having
lots of partners, enjoying all the
fruits of the sexual revolution um, than
do women. And women also
disproportionately suffer the costs of
sexual relationships that go ary. So in
terms of unwanted pregnancies which
still happen even in the age of
contraception I think it's something
like half of um pregnancies in America
probably same in Britain are unplanned
um women on a physical level suffer that
entirely and also women are much more
likely to suffer from sexual violence um
and will be always be at a disadvantage
when alone with a man all else being
equal. Um so in that sense a a a culture
of casual sex is very much worse for
women than it is for men. Even if there
will be some women who
uh enjoy casual sex who seek it out. I
don't I don't refute that. I think that
a culture where that is the expected way
in which one makes one sexual debut say
in college is bad in general for women.
And to some extent I've written this
book as a millennial right. So I've come
out of when I was a student that really
was the prevailing culture that really
was riding high. That might be less true
now. I think we can get on to this.
>> Right. No, we're going to we're going to
talk about how completely the world has
changed since since you wrote the book
in like 2020. Yeah.
>> Right. You're writing about a world in
which sort of
the norms around sex are at least
supposedly defined by hookup culture.
>> Yeah. Okay. So what's So the case for it
I'll just the case for it is
straightforward.
>> Yep.
>> Right. You give women a kind of autonomy
y
>> that they didn't have before.
>> You enable people to escape from
scenarios where they have to marry the
first man that they had sex with. Right.
And then this feeds into a different
kind of material revolution where women
are able to succeed and thrive in the
workplace. Yeah.
>> As never before.
>> Yeah.
>> How does that fit into your critique of
the sexual revolution?
>> Is it just sort of an asterisk? Is it
something that's inseparable from the
changing sexual landscape? How do women
in the workforce fit in? Um it's I mean
it's somewhat distinct from the the
technology shock of the pill that we've
mostly been speaking about but it's
connected. I mean when women
women women's mass entry into the labor
market is partly
partly an ideological product. I would
say that it's actually more a
consequence of the economy changing and
the sort of jobs that women can more
easily do becoming more plentiful. But
also when it takes less time to keep a
household warm, clothed and fed, it
becomes more possible for women to
participate in public life. Obviously
women have always worked but
traditionally the sort of work that
women do is the sort of work that can be
combined with
childare. Um typically in agricultural
societies like processing raw materials
cuz you can do that when children are
around. But anyway, the the nature of
women's work does change post sexual
revolution. A lot of that is to do with
macro changes in terms of technology and
it does present some serious challenges
when it comes to the sexual and
reproductive side of things because
there is a you know Elizabeth Warren
famously in the two income trap points
out that when when it becomes the norm
for both parents to take home a
paycheck, you introduce a fragility in
the domestic economy where if the
mother. Well, if either parent for any
reason stops earning, that's a problem.
And particularly if the mother stops
earning because she's had a baby, that
becomes a real problem because if the
assumption is that you have two
paychecks and you're competing for say
housing against other families who also
have two paychecks, then families with a
single income are at a disadvantage. So
this and this there are ways in which um
this is a very good example I think of
ways in which the
a culture which seems to offer endless
choice to women in particular can in a
way restrict choice. Um, in terms of the
the history of the sexual revolution, I
want to tease out how much the kind of
sexual transformation of society is
separable or not from that economic
transformation.
>> When I think about the history, it seems
like there is a period that is sort of
very distinctively maledriven. M
>> that is that I I think people sometimes
tend to underestimate this because of
the the sort of narrative around it that
folds all good things together, right?
And says we got sexual sexual liberation
and we got feminism at the same time and
it was a wonderful package deal. And in
reality, if you go back to the late 50s
and into the 60s and even into the early
1970s, you would say some of the
dominant figures of the sexual
revolution at that point are Hugh
Hefner, right? Playboy and the Playboy
philosophy. But then you also very
quickly have a feminist reaction,
I think, that picks up on at least some
of the points you're offering in
critique from the beginning, right? that
focuses on sexual violence and rape,
right, and the dangers of those things
that focuses on the vulnerability of
women, the need to sort of figure out
what consent actually means in these
circumstances.
Can you give me your sense of what is
the feminist critique of the sexual
revolution and then I guess from your
perspective, why does it not succeed
>> in sort of dealing with the problems and
the fallout? So yeah, so the feminist
critique of the sexual revolution
emerges, you know, almost immediately.
Andrew Dawan and Katherryn McKinnon,
these are some of the key figures who
are from the get-go saying this is this
isn't in women's interests. And there's
the the the so-called sex wars of the
70s and ' 80s is an intrafeminist
argument over exactly this. And I think
that the um
>> what was it just what was that argument?
So um Jawan and McKinnon among others
were um highly critical of pornography
in particular um and really very
precient about pornography because of
course at the time they were talking
about kind of smarty magazines um which
now seem to us to be quite tame but
actually I don't think that Dawan would
have been surprised at all by what
internet pornography has ended up
looking like. I think that they had a
better sense actually of where the
cultural winds were blowing than their
critics. Um they're also very critical
of the sex industry in general and of
the idea of women's role being as
instruments to
um male sexual pleasure. But they ended
up losing the argument. And it was
certainly by the '9s
the um the sex positive vision as it's
sometimes called was riding high. And
then the emphasis was not so much on um
women as a class being because cuz Dawan
and McKinnon they're thinking really in
Marxist terms about women as a a class
of people who are affected in these kind
of material ways. the the feminists who
end up winning the day culturally take a
more individualistic approach, see it
more as a a choice that women can make
on a personal level to maximize their
own autonomy by using whatever tools
they want to etc. Um, again I think this
is also this is now somewhat consigned
to history but that was the sequence
right you know and then when say Sex in
the City comes along those kind of um
>> right no by the by the time you get to
the late 1990s and the early 2000s this
is sort of the peak of
>> friends as the most popular American
sitcom and then Sex in the City and
there's yeah there's sort of an
assumption that
>> feminism sex positivity and a sort of
highly individual ualistic vision have
have carried the day.
>> Would you say that like a weakness of
the sort of Dworkin and McKinnon
perspective was that it was simply too
sex negative? Right. I mean that's sort
of my my impression looking back, right?
Is that if you say, okay, we have this
fierce feminist critique of the sexual
revolution, but it goes all the way to
saying that in fact there's there's
really no way for men and women to be
together at all. It doesn't rape. I
think she never precisely said those
words, but she obviously meant them.
>> Dwarkin.
>> Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. I mean,
it's interesting how postme too there
was a kind of resurgence of interest in
Dwan in particular and a view from some
feminists that who hadn't lived through
the sex wars that um maybe you know they
had it right all along. I have a lot of
respect for Andrew Dawan in particular
mostly because she was an extremely good
writer. I think that often gets
forgotten about her. Um but yeah, I mean
also an extremist, absolutely an
extremist and the hostility towards
men is um palpable. Um but then equally
I mean what comes out of me too right is
this immense sense which I think is
still with us of despondency and
disappointment around what the sexual
revolution seemed to have offered. The
offer was
liberation and is fairly obvious to
everybody that that hasn't been
delivered,
>> right? No, I think you you have to see
me too as as a kind of successor to the
McKinnon and Dwarkin era.
>> Yeah.
>> Where again you have this sort of this
reassessment of
>> hookup culture and everything associated
with it that does sort of adopt a
version of the argument you're making,
right? That this is a landscape that
obviously benefits men or at least
powerful men, exploitative men,
predatory men. Yeah.
>> But then where do you think me too ends
up? Like what is the cultural takeaway
from me too? Where does it leave us?
>> Yeah. I mean so the solution offered by
me too
is
I I
so either I guess employing sort of
gossip networks to damage male
reputations um is one of the few tools
that women do have at their disposal to
deal with predatory men. Um, so it's
that and then it's also
proposals to sort of re-educate men. So
things like consent workshops. I used to
teach consent workshops cuz cuz my first
proper job out of university was working
for a rape crisis center and one of my
jobs was to go into schools and teach
consent workshops. So I'm not completely
opposed to consent workshops.
>> What was it like to teach consent
workshops? just so consent workshops I
think do something different from what
people think that they do. So I think
that the purpose of a consent workshop
is actually to
um typically taught in schools or
universities is to tell students what
the law is to protect the institution
and that we've made it clear what's
acceptable and also to tell victims
where they can go for help. What consent
workshops don't do is like reprogram
young men, which is I think a typical
feminist response to say, "No, we should
teach men not to rape." I don't think
that is the primary driver of sexual
violence. Ideological. I don't think
that, and this is one way in which I
differ from a lot of feminist thinking.
I don't think that that rape or rape
culture is an ideological product. I
think it's a biological thing,
>> right? primarily which we ought to which
we can respond to in all sorts of
societal ways. Um I mean if we're
concerned about ideological I mean this
is one this is one criticism that I have
of the um more individualistic feminist
position which is that um if you think
that rape is a product of
uh propaganda shall we say um consent
workshops are no match for pornography.
Just think of the hundreds of hours that
a typical teenage boy might be exposed
to pornography compared with 30 minutes
for a consent workshop. I mean, there's
no there's no match. So, just on that
just on that basis, we're we're at a um
we're at a disadvantage. And Dawan and
McKinnon's position on banning
pornography
makes a lot more sense. If you think
that it's rape is a product of ideology,
that makes so much more sense than any
other intervention. And this is why
your style of feminism is part of it
gets labeled reactionary feminism. I
know that's a term that um you're
>> partly a joke, but
>> it's partly a joke. But like all things,
all labels begin as jokes and become
become sort of realities to some degree,
but that's that's a term uh that's I
think most associated with a writer
named Mary Harrington, who's also your
fellow Brit. And so reactionary feminism
as I would describe it seems to emerge
after me too to some degree where you
have this sense okay we had yet another
feminist attempt to get to grips with
the downsides of the sexual revolution
>> and um it just it didn't lead to a
stable system right it just ended up
leading to more alienation between the
sexes um they also emerge in
particularly in the UK in debates around
transgender issues
right? Where the reactionary feminists
sometimes are people who were who were
radical feminists, right? Who were sort
of insisting on differences, biological
differences between the sexes that then
they feel
>> get effaced by the push for transgender
rights. But that's my description.
What's your description of your own of
your own perspective?
Reactionary feminism certainly is a um
it starts from the assumption of bi of
of crucial biological difference
>> and it thinks that many forms of
feminism have underplayed yes how
important that is.
>> Yes. Um, an expression that Mary likes
to use is um, men and women have to find
a way of getting along,
but that is not necessarily a given,
right? In other in other styles of
feminist thought,
I've often been accused of being
anti-men in my book because I say things
boldly like, "Sexual violence is
overwhelmingly committed by men and
sexual violence is a product of male
sexual desire and all this kind of
stuff." It starts it it's a lot of
people take that as an indictment of
men. I don't I just think it's a fact.
But it's paired obviously.
>> Something can be a fact and an
indictment.
>> I suppose so. But maybe I suppose I
forgive men for this because I think
it's also true that there are all sorts
of virtues that are found
are found in men and are maybe found
more often in men than they are in
women. And
>> such as
>> I mean this the this the challenge of
youthful male energy is that this period
of maximum danger in terms of violence
and aggression is also typically the
period of maximum
energy and the risk tolerance that men
have which leads them to do violent
things is often also the same risk
tolerance that allows them to be
inventive and adventurous and all of
these great things. You know, and I say
this as a mother of two boys, you know,
I think I think that
>> you want you want them to have risk high
risk tolerance.
>> Yeah. And this is and in some sense,
every society has to try and solve this
problem. What do we do about this energy
that we find in young men? How do we
channel it? Because if you don't channel
it in a good direction, it's very
destructive.
And so, do you I don't know, maybe you
send them off to war or you or you send
them to boarding schools or whatever.
There's always there are various
solutions that we've tried. I don't
think that the the the solution that has
been toyed with in our own era of just
pretending that men and women are the
same psychologically or physically is is
productive at all. I think that's a
mistake. Um so I I guess that that what
reactionary summons is a different
relationship to the recent past. It's
not an attempt to roll back the clock
just a little bit by a few decades. It's
more of an attempt to look at the sweep
of human history and think okay what are
men and women like and how have people
in different times and places solved
these problems which we are which we are
also grappling with. So my first degree
was in anthropology and in and then I
did a degree in women's history as well.
And um I think that that my an my
anthropological training has probably
done
more even than working in rape crisis to
sort of shape my view of the
contemporary moment cuz I think there
are so many ways in which our our
culture is so strange
in terms of the long sweep of human
history. so strange. And we think such
odd things and have a tendency to assume
that we are um somehow outside of
history or somehow completely unlike men
and women of the past and that we don't
need to solve the problems that they did
using the tools that they had. And hey,
we have the pill. So to some we're not
completely wrong about that. There are
some ways in which we are outside of
history and we have very different um
tools at our disposal.
>> Right? We're in a different
technological moment along several
dimensions. Right? I I want to get to
the question of the effects of the
digital revolution on relations between
men and women. But before I get there,
>> I I just want to consider why a
non-reactionary feminist might look at
your argument or your critique and have
some strong doubts, right? And so I
think
>> one obvious thing that they might say is
okay look yes we have not exactly
figured out an ideal way for men and
women to get along under feminist
conditions. Fair enough. Was the way
that men and women got along in you know
Victorian London or um you know Georgian
London or any any prior period in this
metropolis's history was that some ideal
model? No. Every era has a non ideal
model because life is non ideal. And in
this particular era, women have received
jobs, legal rights, a whole all kinds of
forms of independence. And this is the
crucial point, they are choosing that,
right? Women are more politically
liberal or more politically progressive
in both the United States and in the UK.
Mhm.
>> Uh they've become still more politically
liberal in the last few years and we'll
get to that in a moment. Um but
generally
they are, you know, they they are free
actors in a free society making free
choices. And a case against the sexual
revolution that starts with the idea
that it has been bad for women, isn't
that accusing women of false
consciousness to some degree, of not
understanding their own interests?
So, two things I'd say to that. One is I
think that um
the you know what's sometimes called
hetropesimism, this buzzy word um is is
is an indictment of the social
revolution.
That the
>> what is heteropessimism?
>> Hetropesimism is a word sometimes used
to describe particularly women's feeling
of um antagonism and disappointment
towards heterosexual relationships with
men. um and the feeling of just wanting
to opt out, which is often, you know, a
product of being burned by um hookup
culture. And I think that a lot of this
is downstream of um lack of friendships
with the opposite sex. I think also
feeds into women not necessarily having
had any positive close relationships
with men until they are inducted into a
sexual culture which assumes that the
default initial relationship will be
casual. I think that is a lot of what
explains hetroesses that that that um if
your only experience of men is is within
a culture which does favor their
interests. I just mean specifically the
sexual culture favors their interests.
Um it's not surprising that women are
feeling negative and it's not difficult
to find women raging against a culture
of casual sex.
>> But then also people are still falling
in love and getting married, right? and
they are getting married and falling in
love less often than they did 40 or 50
years ago. But the marriages that are
made have tended now to be a bit more
durable. The divorce rate is down
somewhat. Right? So you have kind of
people people who do get married are
selecting into marriages that are you
know reasonably longasting are more
egalitarian. Right? men do more
housework and spend more time taking
taking care of children and so on. And
>> again, there are the compensations of
professional success and independence,
right? I mean, how do you wait for
those? Like maybe the the price the the
price of professional success and
education is just a little more
heteropesses
>> and maybe some people will just opt out,
>> right?
>> And they're allowed to.
>> Yes,
>> that's fine. And clearly there are
people who are despite all of the um
all of the ways in which we have we have
we have redesigned the default life
course such that it is it is no longer
the standard sequence to you know um be
be essentially matchmade by your
community and then to get married to
have children all this default. Um there
are people who are nonetheless doing
that. One thing that that I would say
though to um to feminists, to fellow
feminists, is that if if if we can't
find a way of encouraging
um a feminist way of having children,
like if feminist cultures turn out to be
cultures that cannot reproduce
themselves, then the political project
dies
within a generation. just the what you
were talking about with heteropessimism,
right? There's there's just much more
hostile discourse between men and women
>> coming from the feminist left, obviously
coming from a kind of masculinist right
and and this I think it's the negativity
that is really striking to me. And
again, lots of this maybe especially in
the states, but I'm sure in the UK as
well has focused on men and male
alienation. Um but there was a really
good essay in the New Statesmen the sort
of left of center employer
>> right British publication about female
alienation that sort of
>> women are moving left out of a kind of
profound cultural alienation deep
pessimism about the whole social
structure like sort of hostility to
capitalism and hostility to young men
seem to go together and then you have
obviously something very powerful
happening with younger and who are sort
of deep into forms of right-wing
politics that are like, you know, sort
of tangled up with misogyny as well as
forms of racism and anti-semitism.
How much of this do you think is just
digital conditions? Like just as the
pill was a revolution, like how much of
it is just the internet is bad for
relations between men and women?
>> I think quite a lot. One of the things
that the internet does is that it
exposes what the other sex is saying
about you all the time.
>> Okay, go on. Yes. No, I this is
something that say say more about what
that means.
>> So, what would previously have been
locker room talk or would have been
women gossiping amongst themselves is
public and exposed in a way that it was
never historically. And I think that
that type of talk ought to be private.
It's it's it's perfectly normal and
natural for people to have mostly homos
kind of friendships and to um and to say
uh un vulgar or unkind things in
private. But now of course the internet
blasts this out into the public domain.
Um I think that is part of the problem.
I think also as and this has been much
commented upon the extent that internet
encourages people to double down on
their ideologies is also part of the
problem. Um, I'm sure that this is a big
part of what's going on with young
women. Um, is
young women are very mimemetic. I mean,
human beings are very mimetic, but young
women, I think, are more mimetic. So,
for instance, young women are often the
originators of of new slang. They're
very sort of socially sensitive, and
fashions and so on often originate among
young women. And that uh that ability
which is is both good and bad is
turbocharged online because the internet
is this remarkable tool for misus. Um
hence why I think you see actually
greater political radicalization among
young women than among young men.
Obviously the young male political
radicalization is more commented upon
because younger men are more dangerous.
It's probably the main reason like we're
more worried about violence that they
might commit. I think the manosphere
is unlikely to encourage young men to be
violent and dangerous. I think is quite
likely to encourage them to be lonely
and sad and that seems like a problem.
Um but in terms of who has actually
changed politically over the last 10
years, it's it's young women who are
veering left and young men who've
actually stayed relatively still. at
least the median young man has
stabilized. Yeah, you can see that in in
polls there's a I think you'll get a
slight rightward tilt for young men and
you do have you do have some polling
that will say
>> you know sort of ask sort of
>> feministcoded questions about like what
are your expectations for your wife and
are working women good for society and
so on. I think in some of those you do
see also some rightward movement among
Zoomer men. Yeah. Um, but if you're just
asking about sort of general questions
of political affiliation, it's a very
stark divergence among young women
relative relative to men.
>> And this is very bad for relationships.
It does seem as though men and women
dradicalize each other through through
exposure, through positive intimate
exposure. Um, and that's exactly what's
not happening.
>> What about though? So in addition to
sort of misogyny on the right and
anti-masculinity
on the left, you also have a sort of
cultural phenomenon in the last few
years that is itself sort of
reactionary, right? Which is the
tradife, right? Are the tradives
successful reactionary feminists? Are
they Louise Perry readers who've taken
who've taken the right the right point
of view
>> who've doubled down on the who yes who
found their internet ideology and double
down. I mean, yes. I mean, trades are an
internet phenomenon, obviously.
>> Yes. What do you But what do you make of
them?
>> I have sympathy with I I think that
tradives
are angry and sad for the same reasons
that progressive feminists are angry and
sad, but they have a different set of
solutions which they think will solve
it. Um, everybody
>> turn churned butter. You turn the
butter. Everybody notices that
not only are relations between the sexes
mutually embittered, but also there are
certain ways in which women's lot is
just quite tragic, there are ways in
which say the nature of the female
reproductive system is that it causes a
lot of suffering often um in a way that
just isn't true for men because we have
more complex reproductive systems. Um
pregnancy is is difficult. Child birth
is painful. there's no way of opting
out. Even, you know, I I can tell from
experience a plan C-section still
necessitates a lot of suffering. There's
no way through this which doesn't
necessitate suffering. And in very
traditional cultures, that's understood
as the counterpart to the male burden of
um waging war and suffering by defending
the community. The the the male warrior
and the female the woman in childbirth
are in some sense the counterparts to
one another. These are these are your
twin roles. Um but of course men don't
do that anymore in cultures like ours.
So you know men have basically been
excused the suffering traditionally um
that they were burdened with and also
men do less of the is a strange feature
of the modern economy is that the jobs
that men used to do including around the
home are quite easy to automate. So we
don't really need men to chop firewood
anymore for instance. Um but we do need
women to do a lot of care work because
that hasn't so far proved to be
something that one can automate. So
women look around and they see there are
burdens that I am tasked I'm am
presented with
which seem unfair to me and rather than
blame God which would be one option
there's a desire to blame
>> or Adam and Eve. Yes, again the trad
option right
>> but for many people they think maybe
this is a product of politics maybe this
is patriarchy whatever and there's an
attempt to try and solve the problem and
I think traders in a sense they're doing
that right like say the the position on
child birth a popular view among um
people in the kind of trad online space
is which of course isn't very tragic
because it's deeply online so there's
inherent contradiction there
>> we're performing everywhere
right? Um is that the reason that child
birth is painful and dangerous and
difficult is because of um modernity has
ruined it in some sense. The hospitals
are the problem that the sort of um
maledominated
I actually wrote my thesis on this that
male-dominated um uh obstetrics has um
has rested it from the traditional
control of women and this is why it's
bad. Um, and so you have things like
free birthing, emerging as a as a a very
small subculture, but this is where you
give birth not only at home but without
any assistance. You give birth on your
own in the hope that maybe this solves
the problem. And of course it doesn't.
So these is just these are wicked
problems. They are just wicked problems.
And I feel very sympathetic to women and
men of all of these different online
generated subcultures who are
sort of raging against the world and the
unfairness of some of
there are there are problems that
modernity can't completely solve. We
live so much more comfortably and safely
than any of our ancestors. You know,
there is still pain, there is still
social friction, there's everything,
>> right?
>> That can't really be solved. And
>> no, but wait, I'm going to ask you to
solve them. That's why that's why you're
here, right? I'm really interested in
what you think the models of improvement
are. Is there a different culture that's
imaginable in a world with the pill and
the internet? Right. Um, and I'm going
to ask you to imagine it. you're in
charge tomorrow, right? And we we can
start this as just what advice would you
give to a young person, let's say, going
to college, going to university, right?
We would say over here going to
university with, you know, minimal
romantic experience who's not sort of
profoundly religious in a way that sort
of sets a script for their sexual life.
How should this hypothetical young
person approach dating? like what is the
system that should exist? I guess those
are those are different questions. You
can take it either way.
>> Well, I'll start by offering one
concrete view which is on contraception.
I am not completely opposed to
contraception.
I think though that women in particular
should behave as if contraception
doesn't exist. If you would not have sex
with this man, if you weren't using
contraception, then you should not have
sex with him at all. I mean, in choosing
the man rather than the moment, you
know, if this man wouldn't make a
potentially a good father to your
children, then you shouldn't have a
sexual relationship with him. I think I
would absolutely say that to my ch to my
sons as well, right? Um, but I'm not
completely opposed to contraception. And
in fact, when the pill was first came on
the market, it was available exclusively
to married women as a means of spacing
births. And actually, I think that that
is the key miraculous thing that that
hormonal contraception can do is allow
women to safely space births for the
sake of their own health. Um, because
having a baby every year is bad for your
body. Maybe that's my concrete proposal
that you should use contraception within
marriage rather than as a means of
seeming to have consequence free sex,
but the problem is it isn't actually
consequence free either either
physically but also socially or
psychologically. Um,
in terms of the rest of it, I mean, I
tend to think that
this might be a problem that kind of
solves itself. People are going to find
in this this the post digital
revolution,
there will be people and there
subcultures that emerge who are able to
solve these problems, who find solutions
to not being completely so deranged by
the internet that they can't form
relationships with the opposite sex.
Something that I'm noticing at least as
time goes by is more and more people
making efforts to log off and to reject
being excessively online.
um as a as a spontaneous recognition
that it is deranging. So maybe more
people will do that as time goes by and
those will be the people who find
spouses and have children and pass on
that culture.
>> Right.
>> Well, I'm I'm No, I I want to dig in a
little bit though on what that culture
actually looks like. Right. So, you're
basically arguing that we should have a
culture of greater sexual restraint.
>> Yeah. in which people try to have sex
primarily with people who they consider
perspective mates.
>> Yeah.
>> So in this world, just to imagine it,
there is still premarital sex.
>> Probably not.
>> There's no premarital sex.
>> I don't know. I mean, I'm not I thought
in this book about just saying
>> So now we're we're becoming very
reactionary here. No, I
>> Well, is it reactionary? It is obviously
completely
uh intuitive to say for a woman having
sex is in some sense is one of the most
consequential things that she can do
because if she gets pregnant by this man
that is there all the options are
difficult and particularly I mean
something I think we forget about
abortion
up until recently up until the 60s and
70s abortion was not just illegal it was
very dangerous there wasn't really a
safe way of having an abortion so for
all of our human an our female ancestors
is your options if you get pregnant and
you don't want to be are all very
difficult.
Of course, given that you should take
very seriously indeed
who you have sex with and when. And of
course, it makes sense to say that
you'll only uh cross this line once the
man has been approved by your family and
community in some sense and also has
made a costly and public declaration of
commitment to you.
And one way of doing costly and and
public declarations of commitment is
through marriage. So
>> So you've re but yeah I have many
questions. So first
in our world
this world right where there is there is
contraception. There is the birth
control pill. There will be you know
unknowable technologies around you know
in the future surrounding surrounding
reproduction right. Um there is
the internet there is sort of a degree
of so just sort of generally
individualism and social liberalization
that's connected with technological
change and economic change and so on
that isn't going away in that world. Is
there is it imaginable to have that kind
of stringent norm
outside of again sort of an intense
religious community?
>> Yeah.
>> Right. Well, I think the religious are
going to inherit the earth for multiple
reasons.
>> But so then in the future, you're
suggesting, right, that this kind of
ethic returns via just the return of
religiosity because religiosity is what
yields people having children, right?
But you were saying that feminists,
progressives, people who are religious
are not religious traditionalists
>> should wish for a world where their own
ideas sort of flourish and continue. So
what are they what are they are you know
someone who's listening to this
conversation who considers themselves a
liberal feminist right and wants to have
an ethic around sex that leads to good
relations. Are you just saying learn
from the conservative Christians?
>> I'm going to draw a distinction between
feminist and progressive.
>> That's fine.
>> So I I I I favor a very broad definition
of feminism just
>> politics for women qu women. Okay. Um
and specifically I think politics that
recognizes the inherent vulnerability of
women and therefore the fact that there
needs to be a sort of rebalancing in
some sense to account for that
vulnerability. That's not at odds with
with being religious. I don't think but
obviously some religions are better or
worse for women in that sense and the
thing that I and where the liberal
feminists watching and I completely
agree is that I don't I don't want
Gilead or you know there are various
real world examples of this. Um I don't
want a world in which women are
completely subservient to men and have
no um it's not even just the ability to
work although that's important. It's the
ability to do things like,
you know, one thing that I really
appreciate about living in the modern
feminist society that I do is things as
basic as the ability to um swim in
public. I I'm also Australian. Australia
has a real swimming culture. And it
occurred to me recently that the beach
culture that Australia has is so modern
and so fragile because it specifically
relies on
um the ability to share common space
without conflict, but also the the the
right of women to go to wear scanty
swimsuits, to go into the sea safely
without being harassed. Like that's the
sort of thing that is potentially
imperiled
by the failure of feminist societies to
reproduce themselves. And I'm using
feminist in the most expansive way
possible. But that culture is itself
connected to permissive norms around
sexuality that
>> allow people who are teens and early 20s
to say nothing of you know older people
right but they're not married they want
to have sex with someone they have sex
with them in I think the same spirit
that you might wear a string bikini to
an Australian beach right it it seems to
me very hard to say we're going to have
a society where there's an ideal of
sexual chastity that is at least
somewhat equivalent to the ideals in the
traditional past and also have
Australian beaches.
>> Yeah, I'm trying to be a centrist. Ross,
no. I know, but it's genuinely
difficult.
>> Well, it's well or to take another
example, right? I think that it is
plausible to imagine a world that had an
ethic of chastity around sex that was
also comfortable with women succeeding
in the workforce.
I think you can separate those things,
but I think it's understandable that
historically feminists look and say we
had the ethic of chastity in a society
that used it to control women, tell them
that they shouldn't go to college or
they should only go to college to meet a
husband and so on. And the fact that two
things came in together historically
doesn't prove that they go together, but
it's an indicator, right? Like can can
you separate those things?
>> I don't know. And I also a also another
strong argument against the actually
feminist position is to say that you
know we would we might like it if
everyone sort of spontaneously realized
that particularly in a world with the
pill that um it is better for you if you
basically adopt soft trad norms on your
of your own valition. But realistically,
if you look at the
every period of the past really, the way
that this actually gets enforced is
through something like [__] shaming and
through sexual double standards. Yes.
>> Is it possible to have I and I don't
like those things. I would rather, you
know, women not suffer like that. Is
that possible?
>> I don't I don't really know. I I'm not
sure if I have
>> I'm I I I
can offer critique. I'm not sure if I
can be the architect of an entirely new
sexual culture.
>> Okay.
I'm but in terms of evolutions right
like this is this is why you I guess
>> you went straight to
very strict norms
>> when I when I asked you right
>> I don't think so
>> and and and that and when you go to go
straight to strict norms it immediately
raises all the questions that I've just
pushed at you including questions that
about you know what happens to gay and
lesbian people under these conditions
where the sexual landscape and incentive
structure is very different. And again,
where an ethic of chastity was
associated with profound hostility to
homosexuality, right? All these
questions immediately come up. And if
you don't have an answer for them, is
there a gradualist position where you
would say look you could have a society
where um you know people were understood
to have sex before marriage,
but there was a kind of ethic around it
that said casual sex is bad.
>> I hope so. I mean, so the one one thing
I'd qu I'd quibble with is strict norms.
Like I don't think that a um
social disapproval of premarital sex
counts as strict. Historically, for
instance, it was quite common for brides
to be pregnant on their wedding day
because often they would have sex on
this they got engaged. There's always,
you know,
>> history is messy in this sense. The
problem though of course with trying to
and this is the challenge always of the
conservative of trying to defend any
kind of historical society is that
people will always point to the the
trade-offs of that model and and the bad
things about that society
>> which are absolutely true
>> but that's that's why I'm pushing you on
to what extent can post 1950s norms
be preserved oberved
around
you know every I mean there's the list
is just extremely long right of things
that you could that you could throw in
questions around consent in marriage and
marital rape right um
>> how much of that is in the end
compatible in some near future or far
future with an ethic of sexual restraint
and to what extent is there just this
fundamental tension that we're dealing
with where you You can have female
emancipation
or you can have sexual restraint, but
you can't have both.
>> Well, I hope that's not true. And I
would say that female emancipation is on
a spectrum. So, one can imagine because
they have existed societies where women
have
say the right to vote, but also there
are clear um
uh default templates for having children
and it's considered eccentric. not to
for instance like that that seems to be
possible. Um whether or not that's
possible long term I guess is the bigger
question because it does seem as as if
there's a tendency to have a uh a
ricocheting between more um permissive
and more restrictive sexual cultures. Um
and maybe that's where we are right now.
when I wrote the book um in whatever 20
2021 I wrote at the end you know at the
moment you know millennial liberal
feminism is riding high but I wonder if
there might be a reaction and there
might be you know you see the you hear
these these trades etc on the internet
you know maybe this is going to be
something more substantive and I think
that has happened and there has been a
significant rebellion against
the liberal feminist assumptions of say
the me too moment
um
>> but it seems to me that both in sort of
the Tradife phenomenon and in the more
male masculinist parts of that
rebellion,
there is just a kind of
one a fundamental unrealism about the
kind of society that we live in and how
it could plausibly evolve. You're not
just going to say now it's 1955 again,
right? That's that's not going to
happen. So what what would be your
argument from a feminist perspective the
people who are like what's she doing
calling herself a feminist right
feminism is you know terrible and
responsible for every evil in society
and we just need to bring back
patriarchal authority why should they
care to preserve things that feminism
has won
>> I think it is good
for women to be
educated and to have minds of their
and to be one of the things that we have
learned from the sexual revolution is
that women actually do have remarkable
capacities to actually outshine men in
some in some professional contexts.
Women are actually just as capable as
men are of of using their intellectual
capacities.
It it is a real shame for a society
aside from the interest of those women.
It's a real shame for a society to lose
that. I would say that that's true. It's
also the case that
professional life is is at odds at
certain crucial moments with motherhood
and that to for women to entirely
imitate the male um life course will
often be at odds with having children at
all. And so there has to be a point at
which that kind of gives way and there
has to be some sight of compromise.
But
>> but why is it good for
the man to help figure out those
balances? cuz that's I mean that's what
certainly like that's what I tried to do
in my own
>> marriage right it's like you are trying
as a man in the 21st century a
conservative man but not you know not a
masculinist influencer right
>> you are trying to find a balance that
enables my own wife
>> to be professionally fulfilled while
also having kids and it is it is a
balance there's no simple solution right
but
>> but why is that good
>> happy wife happy life is that an
expression that Americans used
>> sometimes. I've heard it. Yes.
>> Yeah, that seems that seems compelling
to me. Do you want as a man to have to
manage an unhappy subservient wife? I
think probably not.
>> And if you did, that would be itself
bad, right? That would
>> betray your lack of virtue. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. So, I think that is one reason
too. It seems it seems
I am pro marriage not only because it's
a means for having children and so on
but also because I think one remedy
potentially or the remedy that I take in
my own life at least to um the battle of
the sexes is to look at the the
differences that clearly exist between
men and women and rather than read them
as antagonistic read them as charming
and interesting and funny and you can
there is no better arena in which to
learn that than in marriage and to
become genuinely fond of the opposite
sex. That seems a very important step on
on the road towards men and women
getting along. And again, that seems to
be obviously in the interest of both men
and women to have to have good
marriages.
>> And you probably can't achieve that to
the necessary and proper degree if you
start with an assumption of fundamental
inequality, right? That there is a way.
Yeah.
>> Right. that this is the key insight of
feminism is to say that all good things
flow from some assumption not of
interchangeability but some assumption
of male and female equality
>> that you marrying an equal.
>> Yeah. Um, I guess the reason why
reactionary feminism
may never find a large popular audience
is that I think I
I just have quite a tragic outlook on
these questions. Maybe this is my
instinctive conserv conservatism, like
temperamental conservatism.
I don't think that there are
at scale
clear solutions but I think at the
individual level there can be I think we
one good thing to say for our current
era is that if you have sufficient
agency and strength of will you can
almost have it all pretty much we all
have the capacity actually to resist all
of the all of the negative trends that
we've spoken about today which maybe
wasn't so true for our ancestors. So in
that sense maybe choice is a the modern
choices available to us are a good
thing.
>> All right on that note Louise Perry
thank you for joining me.
>> Thank you.